 

INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION FOR STANDARDISATION 

ORGANISATION INTERNATIONALE DE NORMALISATION 

ISO/IEC JTC1/SC29/WG11 

CODING OF MOVING PICTURES AND AUDIO 

 

ISO/IEC JTC1/SC29/WG11 MPEG2015/M36556 
June 2015, Warsaw, Poland 
 
 

 
Source  Telecom ParisTech, Canon Research Centre France 
Status 
Title 
Author  Cyril Concolato, Jean  Le Feuvre,  Franck Denoual,  Frédéric Mazé, Naël  Ouedraogo, 

For consideration at the 112th MPEG Meeting 
Editorial changes to the Image File Format 

Eric Nassor 

Introduction 

1 
This contribution proposes various editorial changes to the Image File Format produced during 
the 111th MPEG meeting. 

1.1  Item definition 
14496-12 misses a definition of the term 'item'. We propose to define it as follows 
 
3.1.X item 
data which does not require timed processing, as opposed to sample data. 
 

1.2  Cover image 
The current text contains several texts for the notion of "cover image": 
 
"3.1.4 cover image 
image that is representative of an image collection or an image sequence and should be displayed 
when  no  other  information  is  available  on  the  preferred  displaying  method  of  the  image 
collection or the image sequence" 
 

"NOTE:  The  primary  item  is  typically  a  cover  image  as  specified  in  Erreur !  Source  du  renvoi 
introuvable.. It is recommended not to have a thumbnail image or an auxiliary image as a primary 
item." 

 
"6.3.3 Cover image 

For a collection of still images carried as items in a MetaBox, the cover image, if available, is the 
primary item of the MetaBox. The cover image should be displayed when no other information 
is available on the preference to display a collection of still images." 
 
These texts do not specify any syntax for a cover image. A cover image is the primary item. The 
specification could be simplified by removing all the above texts. 
 

 

 

1.3  Auxiliary Images 
In section 6.3.3:  the definition  of (generic) auxiliary images uses text  that is  specific to  HEVC 
auxiliary images: 
 

aux_type: A null-terminated UTF-8 character string of the Uniform Resource Name (URN) used to 

identify the type of auxiliary image. The URN identifies the resource and the index in the resource 
which identifies the type of auxiliary image. 

 
URNs (in the generic sense) do not  generally identify resources and indexes.  The last sentence 
should  be  deleted.  Also  it  should  be  clarified  if  any  generic  URN  is  defined  by  MPEG  or 
reserved, and how URN should be formed.  

1.3.1  HEVC Auxiliary Images 
In section B.2.5.1, there is a problem with the following note (missing "for"?). 

NOTE:  While  Table  F.2  of  ISO/IEC  23008-2  specifies  auxiliary  picture  types  for  auxiliary  pictures 
within auxiliary picture layers, urn:mpeg:hevc:2015:auxid:xxx may be used auxiliary pictures stored 
as items with an item reference of type 'auxl' to another image 

Additionally, the specification should be implementable without notes. The following note seems 
to  contain  normative  text  as  to  where  the  AuxConfigBox  is  allowed  and  where  the 
HEVCConfigurationBox can be placed.  
 

NOTE: The auxiliary image is treated like a master image. Among other things, this means that the 
initialization data for HEVC coded auxiliary images is provided by  an image entry item. The same 
image entry item may contain both AuxConfigBox and HEVCConfigurationBox. It is possible that 
a  master  image  and  an  auxiliary  image  share  the  same  image  entry  item,  in  which  case 
AuxConfigBox is ignored for the initialization of the master image. When several image items share 
the  same  content  of  AuxConfigBox  but  different  content  for  HEVCConfigurationBox,  it  may  be 
preferable to have an image entry item containing  AuxConfigBox separately from the image entry 
items  containing  HEVCConfigurationBox,  and  provide  two  'init'  item  references  for  HEVC 
auxiliary images. 

Remove the normative parts out of the note and insert them in the specification text. 

1.3.2  Integer representation 
The following sentence is not precise enough: 
"The xxx in the URN string is the ASCII representation of an integer" 
Strings  in  ISOBMFF  are  UTF-8  encoded,  so  using  ASCII  does  not  add  any  value.  More 
importantly the string representation of the integer is not defined: 'decimal', 'hexadecimal' … 

1.4  Image Entry item 
The draft text introduced the concept of "Image Entry Item". This concept is hard to understand. 
In  particular,  the  analogy  to  "sample  entry"  is  only  understandable  to  few  people.  It  should  be 
renamed  from  "image  entry  item"  to  "image  initialization  item".  Additionally,  the  text  needs 
clarifications. 
 
It is very hard to understand that the item_type defines the syntactical structure associated to it 
and  that  a  complex  hierarchy  of  structures  is  defined.  For  example,  there  is  no  explicit  place 
where  one  can  find  the  syntax  associated  to  a  given  item_type  4CC.  A  table  would  help.  For 
instance, the "ient" value is not clearly associated with the ImageItemEntry class. Another 
example is the "AuxImageItemEntry" for which the item type is hard to identify. 

 

 

1.5  Reference samples 
In 7.4.1.1, the text introduces s, r, and q but indicates in a note that the samples should be in the 
order q, r and s. This is confusing. 

1.6  MIME Types 

1.6.1  sub-type vs. codecs vs. Profiles (Annex D.3) 
The  proposed  codecs  sub-parameter  mixes  coding  and  storage  aspects.  It  should  be  there  to 
identify the media codecs used in the file not the way the codecs data is packed in the mp4 file. 
The MIME sub-type 'heic' already hints on that and the profiles sub-parameter could list brands 
for that as well. If files are declared with video/mp4, the profiles sub-parameter should indicate 
brands that hint that the file has IFF structures. We suggest removing the part defining 'metaitem' 
and 'irot' (and alike). The example below: 
 
Content-Type: image/heic; codecs=metaitem.irot+hvc1.A1.80.L93.B0 
would become: 
Content-Type: image/heic; codecs=hvc1.A1.80.L93.B0; 
profiles=mif1 

1.6.2  order of tracks 
In Annex E.2, the current MIME registration annex forces (for the first time in the ISOBMFF) to 
process the file tracks in a specific order in order to produce the codecs value, with the following 
sentence: 
 
"the  first  list  item  shall  represent  a  track  having  the  handler 
type 'pict'" 
 
This  means  that  one  cannot  simply  process  all  items  and  tracks  in  the  given  file  order.  This 
introduces unnecessary complexity.  

1.6.3  missing implementation 
In Annex D.2, the MIME Type registration annexes indicate: 

Interoperability considerations: A number of interoperating 

implementations exist within the ISO/IEC 14496 
community, and that community has reference software 
for reading and writing the file format. 

 
We believe the annex should be delayed until such interoperable implementations are produced. 

1.7  extra "the" 
 
"3.1.13 Image File Format 
the file format specified by this specification" 
Extra "the" 

 

 

1.8  too many "indicated" 
"3.1.5 derived image 
image  that  is  represented  in  a  file  by  an  indicated  operation  to  indicated  images  and  can  be 
obtained by performing the indicated operation to the indicated images" 

1.9  too many "meta" 
Consider  renaming  ISOBMFFMetaData  to  ISOBMFFImageMetaData  to  avoid  confusion 
with the ISOBMFF "meta" box.  

1.10 Clean aperture 
In section 7.2.1, Note on CleanApertureBox:  

NOTE:  When  a  CleanApertureBox  is  present  in  a  sample  entry,  the  clipping  specified  by  the 
CleanApertureBox takes place before applying the rotation specified by the matrix syntax element. 

This  note  defines  a  normative  behavior.  It  is  only  a  note  because  this  behavior  is  already 
normatively defined in 14496-12, add "As specified in 14496-12 XXX" 

1.11 No need for justification  
In section 7.2.3.4, the following text is not proper standard text, no need to justify the usefulness 
of some feature: 
"This  is  useful to  a decoder because  with  this knowledge, as well as the  profile-level-tier flags 
signalled  in  the  sample  entry,  it  can  assign  the  appropriate  amount  of  buffer  space  to  store  the 
reference images." 
Make the text a note. 

1.12 Reserved value 
In 7.2.3.4 
" Readers shall ignore reserved regardless of its value."  
should be 
"Readers compliant to this version shall ignore reserved regardless of its value." 
or the sentence be removed. 

1.13 ISOBMFFMetadata 

1.13.1 Confusing text 
In section 6.6.1, the following text is confusing: 
" may also contain any boxes of ISOBMFFMetaData describing the linked image items " 
should be: 
"  may  also  contain  any  of  the  possible  boxes  in  ISOBMFFMetaData  describing  the  linked 
image items " 
 

1.13.2 Missing 'rloc' 
In  section  8.5.2,  the  'rloc'  box  can  be  present  in  the  ISOBMFFMetadata  box  like  'clap'  …  It 
should be added explicitely and not implicitely allowed in extra boxes.  

1.13.3 Semantics of Image spatial extents 
In section 8.5.3.3: definition of ImageSpatialExtentsBox mentions the term “associated image” 

 

 

We suggest using “associated image” in the semantics section: 
Replace : 
display_width specifies the width of the image  in pixels. 
display_height specifies the height of the  image in pixels 
 
With: 
display_width specifies the width of the associated image  in pixels. 
display_height specifies the height of the associated image in pixels 
 
There should also be a note to indicate that the term "associated image" could mean a tile. 

1.13.4 Terms and definitions misplaced 
Section 7.4.1.1: The terms "direct reference sample" (and others) should be defined in the terms 
and definitions section. 

1.13.5 Thumbnail and image sequence tracks 
Section 7.5.2, the following sentence is unclear: 
"the thumbnail track and the image sequence track are signaled to be a part of the same alternate 
group" 
The verb "are" should be replaced by "should be". 
 

1.13.6 Tile 
In Section B.2.6.1., "An HEVC tile  item is stored as items  of type  'hvt1'",  "is" should be 
replaced by "shall be" 
 

1.13.7 Tile 
In B.2.6.2.3, the tile location semantics should be more explicit and say: 
“indicates  the  position  of  the  HEVC  tile  item  within  the  HEVC  image  item  (when  only  one 
‘hvc1’ item is present) or within the HEVC image item referenced by the ‘tbas’ reference type 
(when several ‘hvc1’ items are present)” 
 

1.14 Hidden images 
In  section  9.3.3.1:  "An  entity  group  of  type  'altr'  that  includes  image  items  shall  include 
either all hidden or all non-hidden items." 
This  is  confusing.  What  happens  if  2  non-hidden  images  are  not  alternate  and  there  is  a  third 
hidden image?  

 

