 

 

INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION FOR STANDARDISATION 

ORGANISATION INTERNATIONALE DE NORMALISATION 

ISO/IEC JTC1/SC29/WG11 

CODING OF MOVING PICTURES AND AUDIO 

 

ISO/IEC JTC1/SC29/WG11 MPEG2015/M37257 
October 2015, Geneva, Switzerland 
 
 

 
Source  Telecom ParisTech 
Status 
Title 
Author  Cyril Concolato, Jean Le Feuvre 

For consideration at the 113th MPEG Meeting 
MIME type for subtitle-only files 

Introduction 

1 
This  contribution  discusses two aspects  related to the use of subtitles in  MP4 files:  the general 
MIME type for subtitle-only files, and the codecs parameter for file carrying TTML subtitles. 

2  General consideration for the MIME Type of subtitle-only files 
Many  people  start  using  subtitle-only  files  for  use  in  DASH  context.  RFC  4337  defining  the 
mime type for MP4 files does not have any mention of subtitle. It indicates: 
 
" The MIME types to be assigned to MP4 files are selected according to 
   the contents.  Basic guidelines for selecting MIME types are as 
   follows: 
 
   a) if the file contains neither visual nor audio presentations, but 
      only, for example, MPEG-J or MPEG-7, use application/mp4; 
 
   b) for all other files, including those that have MPEG-J, etc., in 
      addition to video or audio streams, video/mp4 should be used; 
      however: 
 
   c) for files with audio but no visual aspect, including those that 
      have MPEG-J, etc., in addition to audio streams, audio/mp4 may be 
      used." 
 
 
The  distinction  between  "visual"  and  "video"  is  subtle  and  does  not  seem  to  be  always 
understood. Is a subtitle stream a visual stream? Probably. So the correct mime type for subtitle 
only could have been video/mp4. However, the DASH-IF IOP table 18 lists "application/mp4" as 
the correct MIME type for encapsulated TTML. Additionally, given that the content is text, one 
might think that "text/mp4" should have been used. 
 
We  recommend  updating  the  RFC  to  mention  subtitle-only  file  and  to  clarify  that  the 
"application/mp4" MIME type shall be used (or allow text/mp4 for such files ?). 

 

 

3  Codecs parameter for TTML in MP4 
ISO/IEC  14496-30  defines  the  carriage  of  TTML  in  MP4  files  using  the  generic  carriage  of 
XML Subtitles. In particular, this means that the SampleEntry code is 'stpp'. Many people seem 
to think that 'stpp' is meant for TTML only. In particular, many implementations seem to expect 
that a media with MIME type 'video/mp4; codecs="stpp"' refers automatically to TTML. 
 
The specification should be updated to clarify that aspect by:  
 
- either specifying a TTMLSampleEntry using the 'stpp' 4CC with the exact same syntax as the 
current XMLSubtitleSampleEntry and to use another 4CC for generic XMLSubtitleSampleEntry 
(such  as  'xmls').  Such  change  would  break  existing  software  and  content  that  uses  'stpp'  for 
generic  XML  but  would  achieve  backwards  compatibility  with  current  TTML  content  and 
readers.  This  would  still  require  a  clear  statement  that  the  codecs  parameter  for  TTML  is 
"stpp.xxxx", where "xxxx" is defined below. 
 
-  or  defining  explicitly  the  "codecs"  MIME  parameter  for  TTML-based  content.  We  suggest 
indicating  that  if  the  XML  language  used  is  based  on  TTML  (ie.  if  the  namespace  of  the  root 
element  of 
the  codecs  parameter  be 
"stpp.ttml.xxxx", where "xxxx" is defined below. 
 
In  both  case,  the  ".xxxx"  part  would  be  optional  but  recommended,  with  the  "xxxx"  being 
replaced  by  a  profile  identifier  as  defined  in  the  TTML  Registry  or  a  combination  of  profile 
identifiers using the | or + symbols as recommended by the registry. 

is  TTML's  namespace), 

the  XML  document 

4  Conclusion 
We propose issue a corrigendum to ISO/IEC 14496-30, to add an annex to Part 12 to define its 
MIME type, and to update the IANA registry for the definition of the MP4 MIME to point to that 
Annex.  
 
We  furthermore  kindly  ask  the  FF  AhG  to  welcome  any  further  contributions  on  how  the 
mapping  from  a  TTML  document  to  its  TTML  registry  could  be  simply  made,  in  order  to 
simplify the tasks of file writers and dash segmenters. 

5  References 

[1]  DASH-IF IOP, http://dashif.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/DASH-IF-IOP-v3.1.pdf 
[2]  TTML Registry: https://www.w3.org/wiki/TTML/CodecsRegistry 

 
 

 

