 

 

INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION FOR STANDARDISATION 

ORGANISATION INTERNATIONALE DE NORMALISATION 

ISO/IEC JTC1/SC29/WG11 

CODING OF MOVING PICTURES AND AUDIO 

 

ISO/IEC JTC1/SC29/WG11 MPEG2015/M37251 
October 2015, Geneva, Switzerland 
 
 

 
Source  Telecom ParisTech, Canon Research Centre France 
Status 
Title 
Author 

For consideration at the 113th MPEG Meeting 
Editorial comments on LHEVC File Format 
Jean Le Feuvre, Cyril Concolato, Franck Denoual, Frédéric Mazé, Eric Nassor 

Introduction 

1 
In this contribution we provide editorial and technical inputs on the DIS text. 

2  Temporal Sub Layers  
HEVC stores all temporal sublayers in the same track as the base layer. Reading the L-HEVC, 
there seems to be no indication that temporal sublayers may be stored in different tracks than the 
layer itself. Section 9.3 indicates: 
“L-HEVC streams are stored in accordance with 8.2” (aka HEVC track Structure). 
 
However  the  LayerInfoGroupEntry  seems  to  indicate  that  not  all  sublayers  can  be  in  a  track 
(usage of min and max sublayers). This should be clarified, either by: 
 
Adding to 9.3: 
“Temporal  sublayers  of  an  L-HEVC  layer  shall  be  stored  in  the  same  track  as  the  L-HEVC 
layer”. 
and removing the references to min/max sublayers 
 
Or updating in 9.3 sentence : 
“L-HEVC  streams  are  stored  in  accordance  with  8.2”  (aka  HEVC  track  Structure),  with  the 
exception that temporal sublayers of an L-HEVC layer may be stored in a different track as the 
L-HEVC layer”. 

3  L-HEVC samples and VCL 
The specification states in section 9.6.2: 
“After resolution of extractors, an L-HEVC sample shall contain at least one VCL NAL unit.” 
 
This  may  not  be  the  case  for  tile  tracks  in  L-HEVC,  or  for  L-HEVC  if  we  allow  splitting  a 
NALUs  of  a  given  layer_id  among  tracks  (not  forbidden  …);  in  some  cases,  we  could  end  up 
with a sample of a track containing only parameter sets or SEI messages. We suggest clarifying 
as follows: 
 

 

 

“If explicit reconstruction is used, after resolution of extractors, an L-HEVC sample shall contain 
at least one VCL NAL unit. If implicit reconstruction is used, an L-HEVC sample may contain 
only non VCL NAL units.” 

4  Data copy of NAL Units in tracks 
As said in m36650, the current text allows for pure data copy of a NAL, as said in 9.7.2: 
“Different tracks may logically share data. This sharing can take one of the following two forms: 

a)  The sample data is duplicated in different tracks. 

” 
There is an editorial comment on this sentence (currently in DIS text: w15479): 
“M36560  suggested  to  remove  the  ability  to  hard  copy  data  between  tracks  in  order  to  avoid 
collecting several time the same AU when using implicit reconstruction, but the minutes are not 
clear about that. Should we only allow extractors for data sharing (I really prefer this)?” 
 
The  problem  is  that  when  the  AU  reconstruction  is  implicit  (without  extractors),  a  file  reader 
reconstructing an AU from two tracks carrying duplicate NALUs from the same layer will have 
no way to identify the duplication, resulting in a non-compliant reconstructed bitstream. 
 
With SVC, this was not an issue since a single track (potentially with extractor to other tracks) 
was used. MVC does not seem to allow data copy, since implicit reconstruction is used (this is 
not very clear in the spec, but the section “data sharing and extraction” is not present for MVC).  
 
We suggest removing the data copy possibility and replace: 
“Different tracks may logically share data. This sharing can take one of the following two forms: 

a)  The sample data is duplicated in different tracks. 
b)  There may  be instructions on how to  perform this copy  at  the time that the file is  read. 

For this case, Extractors (defined in A.3) are used.” 

With 
 
“Different  tracks  may  logically  share  data.  There  may  be  instructions  on  how  to  perform  this 
copy  at  the  time  that  the  file  is  read.  For  this  case,  Extractors  (defined  in  A.3)  are  used. 
Otherwise, implicit data sharing as described in this section can be used.” 

5  Order of NAL Units in tracks 
Currently there are no restrictions on how multiple layers are stored in a track when no extractors 
are used. Especially, it is possible to store NAL units out of decoding order. When extractors are 
used  this  is  not  the  case  (Section  9.6.2.  says:  “The  order  of  all  NAL  units  included  in  an 
Aggregator  or  referenced  by  an  Extractor  is  exactly  the  decoding  order  as  if  these  NAL  units 
were present in a sample not containing Aggregators/Extractors”). 
We  believe  the  absence  of  a  restriction  on  layer  per  track  organization  complicates  a  lot  the 
implicit  AU  reconstruction  process  in  terms  of  memory  processing.  We  suggest  including  the 
following restriction in section 9.7.2: 
“NAL units in an LHEVC track shall always be stored in increasing order of nuh_layer_id, 
and for a same value of nuh_layer_id, in increasing order of temporal_id.” 
 
 

 

 

Implicit reconstruction and extractors 

6 
In section 9.7.2 the specification states: 
“Otherwise, an access unit is reconstructed from the respective samples in the required tracks, as 
indicated by the Operating Points Information and Layer Information sample groups. Extractors 
in the respective samples are ignored, and other NAL units are arranged...” 
 
Ignored is not strong enough as it may lead to file readers not removing the extractors present in 
the  sample.  We  suggest  being  more  specific:  “Extractors  in  the  respective  samples  shall  be 
ignored and removed from the bitstream, and other NAL units shall be arranged...” 
 

7  L-HEVC visual width and height 
Section 9.7.4 indicates “otherwise they shall be the maximum visual width and height” 
However  the  spec  says  in  4.6:  “If  the  width  or  height  of  the  sequence  changes,  then  a  new 
sample entry is needed.” 
 
The ISOBMFF spec also says generally that the maximum is used. 
 
Which one should be picked? We believe the statement in 4.6 shall apply. 
 

8  Sync sample 
In 9.7.5, the specification says: “An L-HEVC sample is considered as a sync sample if the base 
layer picture in the access unit is an IRAP picture as defined in ISO/IEC 23008-2.” 
 
Given  the  Defect  Report  on  part  15,  shouldn’t  the  base  layer  be  a  “sync  sample”  rather  than  a 
“IRAP picture” ? 
 

9  Reference error 
In section 10.6.1 the specification indicates Annex B for the extractor, it should be annex A: 
“Both the HEVC/LHEVC tile track and the track containing the associated layer, as indicated by 
the ‘tbas’ track reference, may use extractors, as defined in Annex A” 

10 Conclusion 
We suggest MPEG to issue a study text for ISO/IEC 14496-15 with the above issues addressed. 
 
 
 

 

