 

INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION FOR STANDARDISATION 

ORGANISATION INTERNATIONALE DE NORMALISATION 

ISO/IEC JTC1/SC29/WG11 

CODING OF MOVING PICTURES AND AUDIO 

 

ISO/IEC JTC1/SC29/WG11 MPEG2015/M37253 
October 2015, Geneva, Switzerland 
 
 

 
Source  Telecom ParisTech, Canon Research Centre France 
Status 
Title 
Author 

For consideration at the 113th MPEG Meeting 
Comments on LHEVC tracks layering 
Jean Le Feuvre, Cyril Concolato, Franck Denoual, Frédéric Mazé, Eric Nassor 

Introduction 

1 
During MPEG 112, concerns were raised that a single layer per track design would complicate 
the  job  of  the  file  writer  and  may  impact  the  file  size  by  duplicating  the  different  tables.  The 
minutes of the File Format Break-out Group also indicate that “It seems that not using extractors 
may lead to a slight problem – in temporal scalability one would naturally need a sample in the 
higher layer.” 
In this contribution we review the implicit reconstruction process as documented in the DIS text.  

Implicit reconstruction process of access units 

2 
The implicit AU reconstruction process allows reconstructing access units without extractors.  
In such case, the file reader is in charge of: 

- 
- 

- 

- 

locating the proper layers required for the target operation point (‘oinf’ sample group) 
checking  whether  the  track  contains  these  layers  for  a  given  sample  decode  time  (‘linf’ 
sample group) 
reconstructing  the  AU  of  a  given  decode  time  DTS,  gathering  all  samples  in  identified 
tracks with the same DTS, if any 
reorganizing  (mostly  re-ordering)  the  NALUs  per  increasing  nuh_layer_id  and  then 
temporal sublayer IDs 

 
This reconstruction method works for all cases, including: 

all layers in a single track 
all layers in a dedicated track 

- 
- 
-  mix of layers in the same tracks, other layers dedicated tracks 
- 

splitting  of  temporal  layers  in  different  tracks  (the  ‘stts’  table  will  obviously  need 
adjustment). 

 
Filtering of layers is quite simple: 

- 

since all tracks containing layers of the same base shall use the same timescale, matching 
the  samples  across  tracks  is  a  simple  matter  of  checking  ‘stts’  entries  (note  that  this 
process is also required for extractors resolution). 

-  Walking  through  NALUs  and  selecting  them  based  on  their  layer  ID  (note  that  this 

process is also required for extractors resolution). 

 

As shown in m36560 extractors can be quite costly, whether for tiles or for L-HEVC. Given 
this,  we  wonder  why  extractors  are  actually  needed  (remember  MPEG  “one  tool  one 
functionality”).  The  specification  should  either  provide  strong  use  cases  for  extractors  that 
cannot be fulfilled with implicit AU reconstruction, and restrict the use of extractors to these 
use  cases,  or  maybe  extractors  for  HEVC  should  simply  be  dropped  since  extractor 
cookbooks are as computationally costly as implicit reconstruction. 

 

Indicating track hierarchy with implicit reconstruction process 

3 
There are cases where identifying hierarchical dependencies between tracks containing a layered 
coded  media  is  useful;  especially  in  DASH  delivery,  the  mapping  of  track  references  to 
Representation’s dependencyId. The drawback  with implicit AU reconstruction is  that no track 
dependencies are indicated, since ‘scal’ dependencies are used for extractors reconstruction only. 
Using extractors only for indicating such dependencies is quite costly (12+ bytes per extractor). 
 
When  hierarchy  is  well  defined  among  LHEVC  tracks,  we  suggest  allowing  describing  them 
through a ‘dpnd’ track reference to indicate track containing the lower layers for a given LHEVC 
track, in their order of dependencies. If extractors were to be removed for LHEVC, obviously the 
‘scal’ track reference should be reused for this purpose. 
 

4  Further simplifications on layering 
Given the high number of possible combinations for storing LHEVC in ISOBMFF and previous 
discussions  at  MPEG  110,  111  and  112,  we  suggest  restricting  the  storage  of  HEVC  layers  by 
allowing only the following combinations: 

- 
- 

- 

all layers including the base HEVC in a single track 
each layer in a dedicated track, or multiple tracks when tile tracks are used, including its 
temporal sublayers.  
each  layer  in  a  dedicated  track,  or  multiple  tracks  when  tile  tracks  are  used,    and  each 
temporal sublayer in a dedicated track. 

 
The advantage of such limitations is that it keeps track dependencies simple.  
  
These rules could either be in the core specification, or defined by a new brand “lhev”. 
 

5  Conclusion 
We  suggest  MPEG  to  issue  a  study  text  for  ISO/IEC  14496-15  taking  the  suggested 
modifications into account. 
 

