 

 

INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION FOR STANDARDISATION 

ORGANISATION INTERNATIONALE DE NORMALISATION 

ISO/IEC JTC1/SC29/WG11 

CODING OF MOVING PICTURES AND AUDIO 

 

ISO/IEC JTC1/SC29/WG11 MPEG2015/M37252 
October 2015, Geneva, Switzerland 
 
 

 
Source  Telecom ParisTech, Canon Research Centre France 
Status 
Title 
Author 

For consideration at the 113th MPEG Meeting 
Comments on extractors usage in 14496-15 
Jean Le Feuvre, Cyril Concolato, Franck Denoual, Frédéric Mazé, Eric Nassor 

Introduction 

1 
During  MPEG  112  in  Warsaw,  contribution  m36547  carefully  reviewed  the  impact  of  badly 
formatted “extension” NAL units in AVC or HEVC when interpreted by an annex B (so-called 
“byte-stream” format) parser. Based on this contribution, both Defect Report and 14496-15 DIS 
have been edited. This contribution discusses these edits and proposes to replace them. 

2  Specification Review 
 
The SVC specification states in 6.2: 
“Aggregators  and  Extractors  shall  be  processed  as  defined  in  this  International  Standard  (e.g. 
shall not directly be placed in the output buffer while accessing the file)” 
 
The MVC specification states in 7.3: 
“Aggregators  and  Extractors  shall  be  processed  as  defined  in  this  International  Standard  (e.g. 
shall not directly be placed in the output buffer while accessing the file).” 
 
The L-HEVC specification states in 9.3: 
“Aggregators and Extractors shall not be directly output by file parsers” 
 
Annex A states: 
“Aggregators  and  Extractors  are  file  format  internal  structures  enabling  efficient  grouping  of 
NAL units or extraction of NAL units from other tracks. 
Aggregators and Extractors use the NAL unit syntax. These structures are seen as NAL units in 
the context of the sample structure. While accessing a sample, Aggregators  must  be  removed 
(leaving their contained or referenced NAL units) and Extractors must be replaced by the data 
they reference. Aggregators  and  Extractors  must  not  be  present  in a  stream outside the file 
format.” 
 
We therefore fail to see where the problem is: since readers not removing/solving extractors are 
not compliant, changing the syntax of the extractors / aggregator for HEVC is not needed. 

 

 

3  Possible Solutions 
Our analysis is that the issue comes for avc only (since l-hevc is not out there). 
The  issue  can  be  summarized  as  follows:  SVC  or  MVC  streams  may  be  stored  in  a  track  with 
‘avc1’  sample  description,  and  the  SVC  or  MVC  components  may  use  extractors/aggregators 
(not the base).  

3.1  Approach 1 
As  seen  previously,  compliant  readers  (e.g.  existing  ones)  shall  remove  aggregators  and 
extractors. We therefore suggest adding the following note after Table 4:  
 
“Note:  When  a  track  with  ‘avc1’  sample  description  contains  an  svcC  configuration,  readers 
should be aware that extractors/aggregators may be present and shall be resolved, as indicated in 
Annex A.” 
 
and adding the following note after Table 6 or Table 9:  
 
“Note:  When  a  track  with  ‘avc1’  sample  description  contains  an  mvcC  configuration,  readers 
should be aware that extractors/aggregators may be present and shall be resolved, as indicated in 
Annex A.” 
 
The same logic could be applied to hvc1/hev1.  
 

3.2  Approach 2 
If true backward compatibility with avc1 is required (i.e. compatibility with readers having never 
implemented something else than avc1), we suggest to issue a corrigendum forbidding usage of 
extractors and aggregators in avc1, but still allowing SVC/MVC NAL units if an svcC /mvcC is 
present in avc1. 
 
The  same  approach  could  be  applied  to  hevc,  forbidding  aggregators/extractors  in  hvc1/hev1, 
and allowing them only in hvc2/hev2 or lhv1/lhe1. 

4  Conclusion 
We suggest MPEG to issue a study text for ISO/IEC 14496-15 that: 

- 
- 

removes the modifications on extractors for HEVC, and  
adds the edits suggested in this contribution, preferably approach 2. 

 
 
 

 

